.\"
.\"	@(#)znap
.\"
.Dd August 30, 2017
.Dt ZNAP 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm znap
.Nd ZFS snapshot manager
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm znap
.Op Fl h | \-help
.Nm znap
.Op Fl nr
.Fl c | \-create Ns Op = Ns Ar frequency Ns , Ns Ar lifespan
.Ar dataset ...
.Nm znap
.Op Fl nr
.Fl d | \-destroy
.Ar regex ...
.Nm znap
.Op Fl nr
.Fl e | \-expire
.Op Ar regex ...
.Nm znap
.Op Fl nr
.Fl l | \-list
.Op Ar regex ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
command-line utility builds upon the
.Nm ZFS::Snap
Ruby library for creating, destroying,
expiring and listing ZFS snapshots.
.Pp
Snapshots are named in the format:
.Em dataset Ns @ Ns Em frequency Ns - Ns Em timestamp Ns -- Ns Em  lifespan Ns ,
where
.Pp
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Em  dataset
is the name of an existing ZFS filesystem.
.It
.Em frequnecy
indicates how often these snapshots are created.
Its value is one of:
.Em hourly ,
.Em daily ,
.Em weekly ,
.Em montly .
.It
.Em timestamp
is an
.St -iso8601
UTC timestamp indicating the shapshot's date of
creation. Its value in
.Xr strftime 3
format is:
.Em %Y%m%d Ns T Ns Em %H%M%s Ns z .
.It
.Em lifespan
is the time interval between snapshot creation and expiration.
Its value in
.Xr regex 3
format:
.Em [[:digit]][dwmyHMS] .
.El
.Pp
Options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl h | \-help
Show this message, then exit.
.It Fl c | \-create Ns Op = Ns Ar frequency Ns , Ns Ar lifespan
For each
.Em dataset
given, create snapshot named per specified
.Em frequency
and
.Em lifespan .
If option arguments are not specified,
they default to:
.Ar hourly Ns , Ns Ar 2w .
.It Fl d | \-destroy
Destroy snapshots matching regular expressions
.Em regex ... No .
At least one regular expression must be provided to protect against
inadvertenly destroying all snapshots.
.It Fl e | \-expire
Destroy expired snapshots optionally matching regular expressions
.Op Ar regex ... No .
If no regular expression is specified, then all expired shapshots
are destroyed.
.It Fl l | \-list
List snapshots optionally matching regular expressions
.Op Ar regex ... No .
If no regular expression is specified, then all shapshots
are listed.
.It Fl n | \-no-execute
When combined with one of the flags
.Fl c ,
.Fl d , No or
.Fl e ,
display commands that would be executed,
but don't actually execute them.
.It Fl r | \-recursively
When combined with one of the flags
.Fl c ,
.Fl d ,
.Fl e , No or
.Fl l ,
recursively act on any children of the dataset.
.It Fl V | \-version
Show version, then exit.
.It Fl v | \-verbose
Report diagnostics.
.El
.Sh Examples
.Xr crontab 5
entries to implment automatic snapshot creation and expiration with
.Nm
might look like:
.Bd -literal
# Remove extraneous snapshots hourly.
13 6-22 * * * root znap -d -r /usr/obj /var/cache /var/tmp
# Remove expired snapshots daily.
 0    6 * * * root znap -e

# Create hourly snapshots from 6 AM to 10 PM lasting 2 weeks
12 6-22 * * * root znap -chourly,2w  -r zroot/ROOT/default zroot/usr
12 6-22 * * * root znap -chourly,2w  -r zroot/var zroot/opt
# Create daily snapshots lasting 3 months
 6    5 * * * root znap -cdaily,3m   -r zroot/ROOT/default zroot/usr
 6    5 * * * root znap -cdaily,3m   -r zroot/var zroot/opt
# Create weekly snapshots lasting 13 months.
 7    6 * * 0 root znap -cweekly,13m -r zroot/ROOT/default zroot/usr
 7    6 * * 0 root znap -cweekly,13m -r zroot/var zroot/opt
# Create monthly snapshots lasting 2 years.
 8    7 1 * * root znap -cmonthly,2y -r zroot/ROOT/default zroot/usr
 8    7 1 * * root znap -cmonthly,2y -r zroot/var zroot/opt

.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr zfs 8 ,
.Xr zpool 8 ,
.Xr cron 8 ,
.Xr crontab 5 ,
.Xr zfs-auto-snapshot 8 .
.Sh BUGS
ZFS pool status is no checked prior to take snapshots.
